[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I propose to you that
witnessing is really
what spiritual development
is all about-- crafting
our skill as
witnesses, as pilgrims
through this great mystery.
It is an art, and it can be
done with elegance and skill,
and one might even
say it ought to be.
The art of witnessing
develops much like any other--
with practice and determination.
When we have the
basics down, we can
begin to get creative,
to improvise,
to move into new,
uncharted territories.
It is always most
advisable to continue
refining our poetic impulse.
The poet sees the depth
in all things you see.
For me, there has always
been a happy overlap
between the poet, the
philosopher, and the mystic.
The philosopher poet,
like words [INAUDIBLE]
on nature, who has a taste
for the romantic in their pen,
but first and
foremost, we really
must acknowledge and
honor the poet philosopher
within ourselves, because the
artistic spiritual attitude
connects us to the light
of the soul figuratively
and literally.
It is about a state
of being, rather than
the mere acquisition
of knowledge.
You see, the poet can
sense beauty everywhere.
This is important, because
beauty is a marker for truth.
Beauty is a marker for truth.
The philosopher applies
that truth to life.
They weave it into the
wisdom of living and growth
and expression.
The mystic walks
it at every step.
They test it out, share it,
exchange it, develop it.
There is certainly
a kind of attitude
that helps to augment
our spiritual growth.
Very often in life, we become
accustomed to regarding events
as somewhat haphazard.
Good things happen.
Bad things happen, cool
things, bizarre things.
From a mystical
perspective, these
are illusions that derive
from a false polarization.
Polarization is the breaking
of one thing into two
and the separation
of the two halves.
They are cast out far from
each other to distant reaches,
and then they seem opposed,
but this is not true.
So within this
polarized world, we
are impelled to learn about
wholeness to get to truth.
This is what brings you
unitive thinking and mends what
was once one.
The nature of goodness is
really about wholeness.
The nature of badness is
really about fragmentation.
When we come across a
dysfunction, a challenge,
a piece of brokenness, we learn
to think laterally about it,
not just to label it
as disadvantageous or
inconvenient.
Within the disharmony,
that is a hidden wisdom.
Lateral thinking is different
to our usual methods of step
by step logic.
We take a different
approach, a different route,
more creative, more intuitive.
By altering our
line of engagement
with a challenge in
life, we see more.
Like Sherlock Holmes
arriving on the scene
of some unfathomable
mystery, the regular police
have been there and think
they've seen everything,
and there's nothing else to do.
But their observations
have been very linear
and commonplace and obvious,
so only obvious things
can be perceived.
Knowing this, Holmes takes
a very different approach.
He models the scene
in his imagination.
He examines what
others do not examine.
He looks into realms that no one
else does, and I mean no one.
And this is just the same
in spiritual development.
Very often, we are quite
alone in our investigations,
and this is part of
the initiatory test.
Can we energize ourselves
and craft our discernment
sufficiently to find
the truth alone?
To the ordinary onlooker, a
scene looks a certain way.
This is a chair.
This is a table.
This is a bowl of fruit.
To the spiritual student,
this is not the case.
We understand that the room is
a construct of the imagination.
The chair, the table,
the bowl of fruit
are simply energy fizzing in
and out of the quantum vacuum.
There is no chair,
no table, no bowl.
They are mental ideas.
Neither is the coconut brown or
the banana yellow or the plum
purple.
There is no brown,
yellow, or purple.
They are descriptors.
They have no
actuality in reality.
The physical world is a phantom,
a holographic representation
of something else.
Nothing can be
taken at face value.
Nothing can be taken as it is.
At its very core,
the essence of life
is mysterious,
mysterious by design.
The mystery is the teacher.
The mind can be
programmed by ourselves
to encounter the world more
accurately, more openly,
to cease pretending
everything is still and static
and to admit that it is
actually in constant flux.
Everything is changing
moment by moment.
To dedicate oneself to
spiritual attainment
is to edge away from what we
call village life, to slowly
but surely let go of the
comfortable certainties
and well-worn habits that
previously brought consolation
to our minds and hearts.
The more serious we become about
encountering and expressing
truth, the more we
must learn to let
go of our image of ourselves.
The heavy narrative
that accompanies our
personally has to be loosened.
This is what is meant by
crossing the threshold.
This is what is really
occurring when we choose
spiritual transformation.
There is an air of
self-possession to the human
who is refining themselves.
They are not blown about in the
wind quite like everyone else.
They choose their responses.
They are not all
triggered unconsciously.
They control their
perceptions and are
able to reach deeper
and further than normal.
They decide how quickly to walk,
when to smile, when to work,
when to sleep, when
to play, when to be
filled to the brim with joy.
The spiritual attitude enables
a more profound and spontaneous
encounter with the world.
The beauty of a sleeping child
and the late blooming autumn
flower can be seen
like never before.
Transformation of self
is the ultimate act
of devotional practice.
To become something else
day by day, week by week,
year by year, this is the
only measure of attainment--
to change, to change so
people who have not seen you
for a few years might
even explain that they
don't know what it is, but
somehow you're different
now, somehow.
Not the person
they used to know.
Good.
I'm glad.
This is a beautiful thing.
How bloody awful it would be
to remain the same, to be just
as we were in high school.
When we heal ourselves,
it changes us.
We become different,
and this, ironically,
is why some people choose
not to heal themselves
of their primary wounds.
They prefer to stick
with what they know.
When we strengthen
ourselves, it changes us.
Strength brings adaptation,
momentum, transmutation.
There arises a resounding
purpose and vigor
in one's thoughts, words, deeds.
Meaning and connectedness
increasingly
begin to present
themselves in life.
Things that were
separate become unified.
What was weak and
confusing becomes
solid and comprehensible.
There is more
significance in how
we do things, in the method
of growth and attainment.
Not just information,
put in technique, skill,
and physical action.
With time, this brings a
definite grace and propriety
to one's conduct.
Our physical aspect changes.
A new kind of deportment
can be detected.
We could still laugh and joke
and be silly and playful.
Heaven knows this
is an important part
of the human way and my life.
If we can't do these
things frequently,
we're doing it wrong.
Laughter and play are just
as important to adults
as they were to children.
In truly embracing the
inevitable transformations that
arise from spiritual
growth, we find
ourselves to be on a very
old and very distinguished
kind of pilgrimage.
It is a voyage that
takes us through
both inner and outer landscapes,
familiar and foreign,
pleasing and wrenching,
clear and mysterious.
We develop an instinct for
where to go and what to witness.
We feel what is true
and what isn't true.
We take part in life.
We affirm it and
articulate it further.
We begin to depart the
ordinary train tracks of things
and routines and instead,
begin a relationship
with a much larger universe.
We cease to merely attend
life as a passive onlooker,
and find ourselves with
a wonderful opportunity
to participate, to be involved
in the actual unfolding
of the universe.
Our will and mind become a
living component of reality.
Heart connects us to
that primal pulse.
From the very origin
itself, this is a movement
from the incidental world
into the providential world,
a place where reality is both
received and transmitted.
Once we have felt
spirit in our bones,
once we have tasted its truths
and revelations concerning both
ourselves and the
universe, it is no longer
possible to content ourselves
with the trivialities of life.
Tricks that used to work,
diversionary tactics
of sedation and destruction,
become pale and empty.
The old objects
stop enthralling us,
the 10,000 things of Taoism.
The things of the world
don't do it for us anymore.
Spiritual development
teaches us most emphatically
that the real substance of
life is not in its objects,
but in witnessing and
understanding its methods.
Only soul can lead to such
a fantastic exploration.
And so it is of
the most importance
that we learn to bring its
essence into our daily life.
We feel it.
We sense it.
It is in our dreams.
It is where we truly are.
Thank you for watching,
and have a beautiful day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]